# Utilizing Machine Learning Methods to Predict Patient Outcomes and Identify Novel Biomarkers in Breast Cancer

The goals of this research are 1) to investigate the role that subtypes play in determining patient outcomes and 2) to use machine learning models to identify new biomarkers in breast cancer subtypes with RNA-seq data.

In past years, 2.3 million people around the globe have been diagnosed with breast cancer with 80% of cases being invasive ductal carcinoma. Within this carcinoma, various subtypes exist, distinguished by biological markers like progesterone receptor, estrogen receptor, and HER2 status. Despite advancements in treatments, a considerable portion of patients remain unresponsive, necessitating additional research for targetable biomarkers within these subtypes, a goal of this project. The goals are 1) to investigate the role that subtypes play in determining patient outcomes and 2) to use machine learning models to identify new biomarkers in subtypes of breast cancer with RNA-seq data. For the first goal, I compared PR and ER status in predicting patient outcomes to other subtypes using a Logistic Regression model, Cox-Hazard Model, and Kaplan-Meier Curve. The model achieved an 85% accuracy score and a 0.75 ROC-AUC score for predicting patient status, with the curve and Cox-Hazard model indicating a p-value less than 0.005 for ER and PR status, showing a strong correlation between these PR and ER status subtypes and patient outcomes. Based on those results, for goal 2, I utilized two datasets containing patients’ genetic information on their dysregulation of genes to develop logistic regression models predicting ER, PR, and HER2 status, which had cross-validation accuracy of 85%, 68%, and 87% respectively. Genes significantly associated with ER+, PR+, and HER2+ cancers were associated with genes such as unconventional myosin-isoform genes and plectin-isoform, whereas genes associated with ER-, PR-, and HER2- cancers included DNA repair protein isoform genes and myosin genes. By identifying new biomarkers such as myosin-isoform genes, plectin-isoform genes, DNA repair protein isoform genes, and myosin genes correlated with different cancer subtypes, these models help better understand and recognize the unique behavior of cancer for each patient through which patients get better targeted personalized treatments, necessary to effectively treat and save breast cancer patients today. 
